# Highway-Spending-on-Real-GDP

Causal inference analysis on the effects of government spending on highway and street spending on real GDP in the United States

## About

Dataset used in the analyses was obtained from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics. 

The question I wanted to answer was: What is the causal impact of highway and street spending on the seasonally adjusted real GDP?

`Research Question 2.ipynb` is the main notebook with the causal inference methodology (2SLS), work, and results. Please refer to this notebook to better understand the detailed specifications regarding methodology.

`q2_visuals.ipynb` is a notebook with some initial EDA.

## Methodology

1. I conducted a 2 stage least squares regression with the following variables:
  a. Treatment variable: "State and Local Government Construction Spending - Highway and Street"
  b. Outcome variable:  "Real Gross Domestic Product - Seasonally Adjusted"
  c. Instrument variable: "Highway Fatalities"
  d. Identified confounding variables: "Unemployment Rate - Seasonally Adjusted", "State and Local Government Construction Spending - Transportation", "State and Local Government Construction Spending - Infrastructure", "Labor Force Participation Rate - Seasonally Adjusted", "State and Local Government Construction Spending - Bridge", "Is Recession"

2. Using statsmodels, I used linear regression to regress the treatement variable on the confounders and instrument variable (the first stage of the 2SLS algorithm). This produces an estimate of the treatment variable, controlling for the variation generated by the confounders.
3. Using this new estimate of the treatment, I regressed the outcome variable on it and the confounders. The coefficient on the new treatment variable is theoretically the true causal effect of highway spending on real GDP, assuming unconfoundedness in the data.

## Results

Reminder: a more comprehensive description of the results and everything else can be found in `Research Question 2.ipynb`.

The results from 2SLS indicates that every dollar spent on highways and streets causes the real GDP falls by approximately 274 dollars. This is the opposite reaction to what I expected. One possible explanation for this result is that the effects of investments like highway and street spending are delayed, so investments into highways are not reflected one-to-one with its corresponding real GDP value. 

